Aristotle is clearly invoking the homonymy of the origins (ἀρχαί).
Not only that there are different ways of being origins, but also that
there are different ways for substances to be origins. With respect to
generation, human beings, other animals, and plants are all origins.
If a substance X generates many instances of Y, then X is the origin
of Y. There are two aspects to the claim that X (a substance) is an
origin of Y: (a) X generates Y, and (b) X can generate many instances
of Y. For contrast, consider a plant’s seed (not a substance). The
seed generates only one plant, satisfying (a) but not (b). Elsewhere
Aristotle admits both (a) and (b) as cases of origins, but in this
context, Aristotle is focused on (b).

Aristotle moves from the rather straightforward case of generation of
instances to the claim that only a human being is the origin of some
actions and no other animal is said to be the origin of actions.
Aristotle’s suggestion seems to be that generation is the focal
meaning of origins for the scope of his inquiry and that human beings
are the origins of their actions because they generate their actions.
In cases of generations, the origins are not only from which the
outcomes come about, but they also furnish the form/final cause of the
outcome. For instance, when a plant generates a sapling, the mother
plant (1) is from which the sapling comes about and (2) supplies the
formal/final cause to the sapling. Just as in the case of generation,
the origins are not only from which the outcomes come about, but they
also supply the formal/final cause of the products.  Although
Aristotle has already anticipated his view of human agency, there is
much more to be filled in. As the focus is on a human being qua the
origin of many actions, Aristotle proceeds to clarify the distinctive
way human beings are the origins of their actions.

If human beings are unique in being the origins of actions, then the
doings of non-human animals and children do not qualify as actions.
Later Aristotle claims that children and non-human animals do not act
(at least we do not say so), because they do not act on the basis of
reasoning (οὐ γάρ φαμεν τὸ παιδίον πράττειν, οὐδὲ τὸ θηρίον, ἀλλὰ τὸν
ἤδη διὰ λογισμὸν πράττοντα) (EE II.8 1224a28s-30). This suggests that
doing things on the basis of reasoning is a necessary condition for
action. Since other animals and children do not do things on the basis
of reasoning, they do not act and thus they cannot be the origin of
actions. This is consistent with holding that children and animals are
origins of their doings (and even actions construed in a weak way).
While acting on the basis of reasoning sets human beings apart from
non-human animals and children, it is not obvious that acting on the
basis of reasoning is what makes human beings the origin of actions.
Since not every token of action must be on the basis of reasoning (e.g.
, whimsical and impulsive actions), human beings seem to be the origin
of their actions even when they are not acting on the basis of
reasoning.  Aristotle’s aim in EE II.6 is to articulate the sense in
which human beings (perhaps in virtue of having reasoning) are the
origin of actions, even when their actions are not from their
reasoning.

Aristotle immediately distinguishes between different kinds of origins
and picks out a specific type of origins for his ensuing discussions.
Aristotle makes it clear that the type of origins he is concerned with
are the ones from which (ὅθεν) changes/motions (κινήσεις) first come
about. He calls these origins κύριαι.

Among origins, those that are of that sort—those from which changes
first arise (ὅθεν πρῶτον αἱ κινήσεις)—are called κύριαι, and most
correctly (μάλιστα δὲ δικαίως) those from which results what cannot be
otherwise (ἀφ’ ὧν μὴ ἐνδέχεται ἄλλως), the way in which the God
perhaps governs (ἄρχει). (EE II.6 1222b20-24)

τῶν δ’ ἀρχῶν ὅσαι τοιαῦται, ὅθεν πρῶτον αἱ κινήσεις, κύριαι λέγονται,
μάλιστα δὲ δικαίως ἀφ’ ὧν μὴ ἐνδέχεται ἄλλως, ἣν ἴσως ὁ θεὸς ἄρχει.
(EE II.6 1222b20-24)

Aristotle applies the term κύριαι to the origins in two ways. First,
κύριαι are the origins where the changes primarily come about (ὅθεν
πρῶτον αἱ κινήσεις). Second, the term κύριαι is most apt or most
correct in those cases of origins from which the outcomes cannot be
otherwise, which Aristotle (with hesitation) takes to be God. While
the first qualification isolates the efficient causes required for
generation, the second qualification specifies the manner of such
generation.  With the two qualifications, Aristotle narrows the domain
of origins relevant to the inquiry. Let us look at the second
qualification first.

The case where the outcomes cannot be otherwise specifies the best
case of being κύριαι origins. Aristotle holds that perhaps God governs
in that way. In the second qualification, Aristotle’s focus is in the
manner of governing and not on the notion of generation.  The manner
of governing in the best case has to be such that the outcomes cannot
be otherwise. Since Aristotle picks out God’s way of governing as the
best case, the not-so-best cases would not result in an outcome that
cannot be otherwise but would still govern the outcome. From this it
is reasonably clear that the κύριαι origins are the ones that, in some
sense, govern the changes they bring about. To govern a change, in a
rather minimal way, is to provide a specific direction and character
to the change. Sometimes, the origins may provide a specific direction
and character to a change, but the direction and character of the
outcome may be upset by other factors. That is, an origin can govern
an outcome without governing absolutely, because their manner of
governing is subject to various kinds of interventions. If the origins
govern the outcome in an absolute way so that nothing can upset it (i.
e., no intervention is possible), then those origins are most aptly
called κύριαι. For instance, if God brings about the motion of
celestial bodies, then the motion of those celestial bodies, i.e.
circular motion, would not be anything other than what God governs
them to be. Other origins may not govern in an absolute way, but they
are still called κύριαι, because they govern the outcome to some
extent. Only God (perhaps) can provide a direction and character to
the change in such a way that the outcome cannot be otherwise.

God’s way of governing offers the best-case scenario of what counts as
κύριαι origins. However, Aristotle does not specify the threshold case
on being κύριαι origins. Various origins of change can govern the
outcome in varying degrees. For instance, a seed can provide the
direction and character of change for the organism that comes from the
seed. Similarly, even a final cause can govern the outcome. Thus, the
second qualification on its own does not require that God’s way of
governing is through efficient causation and not through final/formal
causation. Clearly, there is no generation of the motion of celestial
bodies, because their motion is eternal. Perhaps God provides a form
to the motion of celestial bodies such that their motions cannot be
otherwise. Celestial bodies move as they move because they mirror
God’s everlastingness and perhaps for this reason they could not have
moved otherwise. Therefore, the second qualification on its own is not
an adequate characterization of κύριαι origins. It is through the
first qualification that Aristotle limits the κύριαι origins to
efficient causes.

Aristotle claims that κύριαι origins are the ones from which changes
first come about (ὅθεν πρῶτον αἱ κινήσεις). Aristotle reserves the
term ὅθεν πρῶτον αἱ κινήσεις for specifying primary efficient causes
(Vlastos 1963).  With the emphasis on the primary efficient causes,
Aristotle picks out the sense in which κύριαι origins produce their
actions qua efficient causes.  Thus, with the two qualifications
Aristotle restricts the cases of controlling origins to efficient
causes that govern their outcome. Since the term κύριαι picks out how
origins govern their outcomes by being efficient causes, an
appropriate translation for κύριαι is ‘controlling’ (henceforth, I use
‘controlling’ as a translation of κύριαι).

Since Aristotle offers only the best case of controlling origin but
does not specify a threshold case, it may seem that the range of
controlling origins is too wide.  For instance, a plant produces other
plants. Similarly, a seed produces the corresponding organism. In
absence of some threshold, it would seem that seeds and plants are
also the controlling origins of the changes they bring about. I will
now offer some reasons to think that the domain of controlling origins
is not wide enough to includes all efficient causes.
